<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-AU">
	<head>
		<title epub:type="z3998:roman">XVI</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section data-parent="part-1" id="chapter-1-16" epub:type="chapter">
			<h3 epub:type="title z3998:roman ordinal">XVI</h3>
			<p>“See Ed means to do you well with a six-horse team this evening, <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Armitage,” Peter Newton said, while Armitage was having his early meal before starting on his all-night drive into Budda.</p>
			<p>Newton remembered afterwards that John Armitage did not seem as interested and jolly as usual. Ordinarily he was interested in everything, and cordial with everybody; but this evening he was quiet and preoccupied.</p>
			<p>“Hardly had a word to say for himself,” Peter Newton said.</p>
			<p>Armitage had watched Ed bring the old bone-shaking shandrydan he called a coach up to the hotel, and put a couple of young horses into it. He had a colt on the wheel he was breaking-in, and a sturdy old dark bay beside him, a pair of fine rusty bays ahead of them, and a sorrel, and chestnut youngster in the lead. He had got old Olsen and two men on the hotel veranda to help him harness-up, and it took them all their time to get the leaders into the traces. Bags had to be thrown over the heads of the young horses before anything could be done with them, and it took three men to hold on to the team until Ed Ventry got into his seat and gathered up the reins. Armitage put his valise on the coach and shook hands all round. He got into his seat beside Ed and wrapped a tarpaulin lined with possum skin over his knees.</p>
			<p>“Let her go, Olly,” Ed yelled.</p>
			<p>The men threw off the bags they had been holding over the horses’ heads. The leaders sprang out and swayed; the coach rocked to the shock; the steady old wheeler leapt forward. The colt under the whip, trying to throw himself down on the trace, leapt and kicked, but the leaders dashed forward; the coach lurched and was carried along with a rattle and clash of gear, Ed Ventry, the reins wrapped round his hands, pulling on them, and yelling:</p>
			<p>“I’ll warm yer.⁠ ⁠… Yer lazy, wobblin’ old adders⁠—yer! I’ll warm yer.⁠ ⁠… Yer wobble like a crosscut saw.⁠ ⁠… Kim ovah! Kim ovah, there! I’ll get alongside of yer! Kim ovah!”</p>
			<p>Swaying and rocking like a ship in a stormy sea, the coach turned out of the town. Armitage thought its timbers would be strewn along the road at any moment; but the young horses, under <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Ventry’s masterly grip, soon took the steady pace of the old roadsters; their freshness wore off, and they were going at a smart, even pace by the time the Three Mile was reached.</p>
			<p>“Seemed to have something on his mind,” Ed Ventry said afterwards. “Ordinarily, he’s keen to hear all the yarns you can tell him, but that day he was dead quiet.”</p>
			<p>“ ‘Not much doin’ on the Ridge just now, <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Armitage,’ I says.</p>
			<p>“ ‘No, Ed,’ he says.</p>
			<p>“ ‘Hardly worth y’r while comin’ all the way from America to get all you got this trip?’</p>
			<p>“ ‘No,’ he says. But, by God⁠—if I’d known what he got⁠—”</p>
			<p>It was an all-night trip. Ed and <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Armitage had left the Ridge at six o’clock and arrived in Budda township about an hour before the morning train left for Sydney. There was just time for Armitage to breakfast at the hotel before he went off in the hotel drag to the station. The train left at half-past six. But Ed Ventry had taken off his hat and scratched his grizzled thatch when he saw a young, baldy-faced gelding in the paddock with the other coach horses that evening.</p>
			<p>“Could’ve swore I left Baldy at the Ridge,” he said to the boy who looked after the stables at the Budda end of his journey.</p>
			<p>“Thought he was there meself,” the lad replied, imitating Ed’s perplexed head-scratching.</p>
			<p>At the Ridge, when he made his next trip, they were able to tell <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Ventry how the baldy-face happened to be at Budda when Ed thought he was at Fallen Star, although Ed heard some of the explanation from Potch and Michael a day or two later. Sophie had ridden the baldy-face into Budda the night he drove <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Armitage to catch the train for Sydney. No one discovered she had gone until the end of next day. Then Potch went to Michael.</p>
			<p>“Michael,” he said; “she’s gone.”</p>
			<p>During the evening Paul had been heard calling Sophie. He asked Potch whether he had seen her. Potch said he had not. But it was nothing unusual for Sophie to wander off for a day on an excursion with Ella or Mirry Flail, so neither he nor Michael thought much of not having seen her all day, until Paul remarked querulously to Potch that he did not know where Sophie was. Looking into her room Potch saw her bed had not been slept in, although the room was disordered. He went up to the town, to <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Newton and to the Flails’, to ask whether they had seen anything of Sophie. Mirry Flail said she had seen her on one of the coach-stable horses, riding out towards the Three Mile the evening before. Potch knew instinctively that Sophie had gone away from the moment Paul had spoken to him. She had lived away from him during the last few months; but watching her with always anxious, devout eyes, he had known more of her than anyone else.</p>
			<p>Lying full stretch on his sofa, Michael was reading when Potch came into the hut. His stricken face communicated the seriousness of his news. Michael had no reason to ask who the “she” Potch spoke of was: there was only one woman for whom Potch would look like that. But Michael’s mind was paralysed by the shock of the thing Potch had said. He could neither stir nor speak.</p>
			<p>“I’m riding into Budda, to find out if she went down by the train,” Potch said. “I think she did, Michael. She’s been talking about going to Sydney⁠ ⁠… a good deal lately.⁠ ⁠… She was asking me about it⁠—day before yesterday⁠ ⁠… but I never thought⁠—I never thought she wanted to go so soon⁠ ⁠… and that she’d go like this. But I think she has gone.⁠ ⁠… And she was afraid to tell us⁠—to let you know.⁠ ⁠… She said you’d made up your mind you didn’t want her to go⁠ ⁠… she’d heard her mother tell you not to let her go, and if ever she was going she wouldn’t tell you.⁠ ⁠…”</p>
			<p>Potch’s explanation, broken and incoherent as it was, gave Michael’s thought and feeling time to reassert themselves.</p>
			<p>He said: “See if Chassy can lend me his pony, and I’ll come with you, Potch.”</p>
			<p>They rode into Budda that night, and inquiry from the stationmaster gave them the information they sought. A girl in a black frock had taken a second-class ticket for Sydney. He did not notice very much what she was like. She had come to the window by herself; she had no luggage; he had seen her later sitting in a corner of a second-class compartment by herself. The boy, a stranger to the district, who had clipped her ticket, said she was crying when he asked for her ticket. He had asked why she was crying. She had said she was going away, and she did not like going away from the back-country. She was going away⁠—to study singing, she said, but would be coming back some day.</p>
			<p>Michael determined to go to Sydney by the morning train to try to find Sophie. He went to Ed Ventry and borrowed five pounds from him.</p>
			<p>“That explains how the baldy-face got here,” Ed said.</p>
			<p>Michael nodded. He could not talk about Sophie. Potch explained why they wanted the money as well as he could.</p>
			<p>“It’s no good trying to bring her back if she doesn’t want to come, Michael,” Potch had said before Michael left for Sydney.</p>
			<p>“No,” Michael agreed.</p>
			<p>“If you could get her fixed up with somebody to stay with,” Potch suggested; “and see she was all right for money⁠ ⁠… it might be the best thing to do. I’ve got a bit of dough put by, Michael.⁠ ⁠… I’ll send that down to you and go over to one of the stations for a while to keep us goin’⁠—if we want more.”</p>
			<p>Michael assented.</p>
			<p>“You might try round and see if you could find <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Armitage,” Potch said, just before the train went. “He might have seen something of her.”</p>
			<p>“Yes,” Michael replied, drearily.</p>
			<p>Potch waited until the train left, and started back to Fallen Star in the evening.</p>
			<p>A week later a letter came for Michael. It was in Sophie’s handwriting. Potch was beside himself with anxiety and excitement. He wrote to Michael, care of an opal-buyer they were on good terms with and who might know where Michael was staying. In the bewilderment of his going, Potch had not thought to ask Michael where he would live, or where a letter would find him.</p>
			<p>Michael came back to Fallen Star when he received the letter. He had not seen Sophie. No one he knew or had spoken to had seen anything of her after she left the train. Michael handed the letter to Potch as soon as he got back into the hut.</p>
			<p>Sophie wrote that she had gone away because she wanted to learn to be a singer, and that she would be on her way to America when they received it. She explained that she had made up her mind to go quite suddenly, and she had not wanted Michael to know because she remembered his promise to her mother. She knew he would not let her go away from the Ridge if he could help it. She had sold her necklace, she said, and had got £100 for it, so had plenty of money. Potch and Michael were not to worry about her. She would be all right, and when she had made a name for herself as a singer, she would come home to the Ridge to see them. “Don’t be angry, Michael dear,” the letter ended, “with your lovingest Sophie.”</p>
			<p>Potch looked at Michael; he wondered whether the thought in his own mind had reached Michael’s. But Michael was too dazed and overwhelmed to think at all.</p>
			<p>“There’s one thing, Potch,” he said; “if she’s gone to America, we could write to <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Armitage and ask him to keep an eye on her. And,” he added, “if she’s gone to America⁠ ⁠… it’s just likely she may be on the same boat as <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Armitage, and he’d look after her.”</p>
			<p>Potch watched his face. The thought in his mind had not occurred to Michael, then, he surmised.</p>
			<p>“He’d see she came to no harm.”</p>
			<p>“Yes,” Potch said.</p>
			<p>But he had seen John Armitage talking to Sophie on the Ridge over near Snowshoes’ hut the afternoon after the dance at Warria. He knew <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Armitage had driven Sophie home after the dance, too. Paul had been too drunk to stand, much less drive. Potch had knocked off early in the mine to go across to the Three Mile that afternoon. Then it had surprised Potch to see Sophie sitting and talking to <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Armitage as though they were very good friends; but, beyond a vague, jealous alarm, he had not attached any importance to it until he knew Sophie had gone down to Sydney by the same train as <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Armitage. She had said she was going to America, too, and he was going there. Potch had lived all his days on the Ridge; he knew nothing of the world outside, and its ways, except what he had learnt from books. But an instinct where Sophie was concerned had warned him of a link between her going away and John Armitage. That meeting of theirs came to have an extraordinary significance in his mind. He had thought out the chances of Sophie’s having gone with <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Armitage as far as he could. But Michael had not associated her going with him, it was clear. It had never occurred to him that <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Armitage could have anything to do with Sophie’s going away. It had not occurred to the rest of the Ridge folk either.</p>
			<p>Paul was distracted. He made as great an outcry about Sophie’s going as he had about losing his stones. No one had thought he was as fond of her as he appeared to be. He wept and wailed continuously about her having gone away and left him. He went about begging for money in order to be able to go to America after Sophie; but no one would lend to him.</p>
			<p>“You wait till Sophie’s made a name for herself, Paul,” everybody said, “then she’ll send for you.”</p>
			<p>“Yes,” he assented eagerly. “But I don’t want to spend all that time here on the Ridge: I want to see something of life and the world again.”</p>
			<p>Paul got a touch of the sun during the ferment of those weeks, and then, for two or three days, Michael and Potch had their work cut out nursing him through the delirium of sunstroke.</p>
			<p>A week or so later the coach brought unexpected passengers⁠—Jun Johnson and the bright-eyed girl who had gone down on the coach with him⁠—and Jun introduced her to the boys at Newton’s as his bride. He had been down in Sydney on his honeymoon, he said, that was all.</p>
			<p>When Michael went into the bar at Newton’s the same evening, he found Jun there, explaining as much to the boys.</p>
			<p>“I know what you chaps think,” he was saying when Michael entered. “You think I put up the checkmate on old Rum-Enough, Charley played. Well, you’re wrong. I didn’t know no more about it than you did; and the proof is⁠—here I am. If I’d ’a’ done it, d’y’r think I’d have come back? If I’d had any share in the business, d’y’r think I’d be showin’ me face round here for a bit? Not much.⁠ ⁠…”</p>
			<p>Silence hung between him and the men. Jun talked through it, warming to his task with the eloquence of virtue, liking his audience and the stage he had got all to himself, as an outraged and righteously indignant man.</p>
			<p>“I know you chaps⁠—I know how you feel about things; and quite right, too! A man that’d go back on a mate like that⁠—why, he’s not fit to wipe your boots on. He ain’t fit to be called a man; he ain’t fit to be let run with the rest.”</p>
			<p>He continued impressively; “I didn’t know no more about that business than any man-jack of you⁠—no more did <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Jun.⁠ ⁠… Bygones is bygones⁠—that’s my motto. But I tell you⁠—and that’s the strength of it⁠—I didn’t know no more about those stones of Rummy’s than any man here. D’y’ believe me?”</p>
			<p>It was said in good earnest enough, even Watty and George had to admit. It was either the best bit of bluff they had ever listened to, or else Jun, for once in a way, was enjoying the luxury of telling the truth.</p>
			<p>“We’re all good triers here, Jun,” George said, “but we’re not as green as we’re painted.”</p>
			<p>Jun regarded his beer meditatively; then he said:</p>
			<p>“Look here, you chaps, suppose I put it to you straight: I ain’t always been what you might call the clean potato⁠ ⁠… but I ain’t always been married, either. Well, I’m married now⁠—married to the best little girl ever I struck.⁠ ⁠…”</p>
			<p>The idea of Jun taking married life seriously amused two or three of the men. Smiles began to go round, and broadened as he talked. That they did not please Jun was evident.</p>
			<p>“Well, seein’ I’ve taken on family responsibilities,” he went on⁠—“Was you smiling, Watty?”</p>
			<p>“Me? Oh, no, Jun,” the offender replied, meekly; “it was only the stummick-ache took me. It does that way sometimes. You mightn’t think so, but I always look as if I was smilin’ when I’ve got the stummick-ache.”</p>
			<p>George Woods, Pony-Fence Inglewood, and some of the others laughed, taking Watty’s explanation for what it was worth. But Jun continued solemnly, playing the reformed blackguard to his own satisfaction.</p>
			<p>“Seein’ I’ve taken on family responsibilities, I want to run straight. I don’t want my kids to think there was anything crook about their dad.”</p>
			<p>If he moved no one else, he contrived to feel deeply moved himself at the prospect of how his unborn children were going to regard him. The men who had always more or less believed in him managed to convince themselves that Jun meant what he said. George and Watty realised he had put up a good case, that he was getting at them in the only way possible.</p>
			<p>Michael moved out of the crowd round the door towards the bar. Peter Newton put his daily ration of beer on the bar.</p>
			<p>“ ’Lo, Michael,” Jun said.</p>
			<p>“ ’Lo, Jun,” Michael said.</p>
			<p>“Well,” Jun concluded, tossing off his beer; “that’s the way it is, boys. Believe me if y’r like, and if y’r don’t like⁠—lump it.</p>
			<p>“But there’s one thing more I’ve got to tell you,” he added; “and if you find what I’ve been saying hard to believe, you’ll find this harder: I don’t believe Charley got those stones of Rummy’s.”</p>
			<p>“What?”</p>
			<p>The query was like the crack of a whiplash. There was a restive, restless movement among the men.</p>
			<p>“I don’t believe Charley got those stones either,” Jun declared. “ ‘Got,’ I said, not ‘took.’ All I know is, he was like a sick fish when he reached Sydney⁠ ⁠… and sold all the opal he had with him. He was lively enough when we started out. I give you that. Maybe he took Rum-Enough’s stones all right; but somebody put it over on him. I thought it might be Emmy⁠—that yeller-haired tart, you remember, went down with us. She was a tart, and no mistake. My little girl, now⁠—she was never⁠ ⁠… like that! But Maud says she doesn’t think so, because Emmy turned Charley out neck and crop when she found he’d got no cash. He got mighty little for the bit of stone he had with him⁠ ⁠… I’ll take my oath. He came round to borrow from me a day or two after we arrived. And he was ragin’ mad about something.⁠ ⁠… If he shook the stones off Rum-Enough, it’s my belief somebody shook them off of him, either in the train or here⁠—or off of Rummy before he got them.⁠ ⁠…”</p>
			<p>Several of the men muttered and grunted their protest. But Jun held to his point, and the talk became more general. Jun asked for news of the fields: what had been done, and who was getting the stuff. Somebody said John Armitage had been up and had bought a few nice stones from the Crosses, Pony-Fence, and Bully Bryant.</p>
			<p>“Armitage?” Jun said. “He’s always a good man⁠—gives a fair price. He bought my stones, that last lot⁠ ⁠… gave me a hundred pounds for the big knobby. But it fair took my breath away to hear young Sophie Rouminof had gone off with him.”</p>
			<p>Michael was standing beside him before the words were well out of his mouth.</p>
			<p>“What did you say?” he demanded.</p>
			<p>“I’m sorry, Michael,” Jun replied, after a quick, scared glance at the faces of the men about him. “But I took it for granted you all knew, of course. We saw them a good bit together down in Sydney, Maud and me, and she said she saw Sophie on the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Zealanida</i> the day the boat sailed. Maud was down seeing a friend off, and she saw Sophie and <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Armitage on board. She said⁠—”</p>
			<p>Michael turned heavily, and swung out of the bar.</p>
			<p>Jun looked after him. In the faces of the men he read what a bomb his news had been among them.</p>
			<p>“I wouldn’t have said that for a lot,” he said, “if I’d ’ve thought Michael didn’t know. But, Lord, I thought he knew⁠ ⁠… I thought you all knew.”</p>
			<p>In the days which followed, as he wandered over the plains in the late afternoon and evening, Michael tried to come to some understanding with himself of what had happened. At first he had been too overcast by the sense of loss to realise more than that Sophie had gone away. But now, beyond her going, he could see the failure of his own effort to control circumstances. He had failed; Sophie had gone; she had left the Ridge.</p>
			<p>“God,” he groaned; “with the best intentions in the world, what an awful mess we make of things!”</p>
			<p>Michael wondered whether it would have been worse for Sophie if she had gone away with Paul when her mother died. At least, Sophie was older now and better able to take care of herself.</p>
			<p>He blamed himself because she had gone away as she had, all the same; the failure of the Ridge to hold her as well as his own failure beat him to the earth. He had hoped Sophie would care for the things her mother had cared for. He had tried to explain them to her. But Sophie, he thought now, had more the restless temperament of her father. He had not understood her young spirit, its craving for music, laughter, admiration, and the life that could give them to her. He had thought the Ridge would be enough for her, as it had been for her mother.</p>
			<p>Michael never thought of <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Rouminof as dead. He thought of her as though she were living some distance from him, that was all. In the evening he looked up at the stars, and there was one in which she seemed to be. Always he felt as if she were looking at him when its mild radiance fell over him. And now he looked to that star as if trying to explain and beg forgiveness.</p>
			<p>His heart was sore because Sophie had left him without a word of affection or any explanation. His fear and anxiety for her gave him no peace. He sweated in agony with them for a long time, crying to her mother, praying her to believe he had not failed in his trust through lack of desire to serve her, but through a fault of understanding. If she had been near enough to talk to, he knew he could have explained that the girl was right: neither of them had any right to interfere with the course of her life. She had to go her own way; to learn joy and sorrow for herself.</p>
			<p>Too late Michael realised that he had done all the harm in the world by seeking to make Sophie go his own and her mother’s way. He had opposed the tide of her youth and enthusiasm, instead of sympathising with it; and by so doing he had made it possible for someone else to sympathise and help her to go her own way. Opposition had forced her life into channels which he was afraid would heap sorrows upon her, whereas identification with her feeling and aspirations might have saved her the hurt and turmoil he had sought to save her.</p>
			<p>Thought of what he had done to prevent Paul taking Sophie away haunted Michael. But, after all, he assured himself, he had not stolen from Paul. Charley had stolen from Paul, and he, Michael, was only holding Paul’s opals until he could give them to Paul when his having them would not do Sophie any harm.⁠ ⁠… His having them now could not injure Sophie.⁠ ⁠… Michael decided to give Paul the opals and explain how he came to have them, when the shock of what Jun had said left him. He tried not to think of that, although a consciousness of it was always with him.⁠ ⁠… But Paul was delirious with sunstroke, he remembered; it would be foolish to give him the stones just then.⁠ ⁠… As soon as that touch of the sun had passed, Michael reflected, he would give Paul the opals and explain how he came to have them.⁠ ⁠…</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
