<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-AU">
	<head>
		<title>II</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="part-1" epub:type="part">
			<section id="chapter-1-2" epub:type="chapter">
				<h3 epub:type="title z3998:roman ordinal">II</h3>
				<p>In a week or two <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Rouminof’s name had dropped out of Ridge life almost as if she had never been part of it.</p>
				<p>At first people talked of her, of Paul, of Sophie, and of Michael. They gossiped of her looks and manner, of her strange air of serenity and content, although her life on the Ridge was, they surmised, a hard one, and different from the life she had come from. But her death caused no more disturbance than a stone thrown into quiet water, falling to the bottom, does. No one was surprised, when it was known Paul and Sophie had gone to live with Michael. Everyone expected Michael would try to look after them for a while, although they could not imagine where he was going to find room for them in his small house filled with books.</p>
				<p>It was natural enough that Michael should have taken charge of Sophie and Rouminof, and that he should have made all arrangements for <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Rouminof’s funeral. If it had been left to Paul to bury his wife, people agreed, she would not have been buried at all; or, at least, not until the community insisted. And Michael would have done as much for any shiftless man. He was next-of-kin to all lonely and helpless men and women on the Ridge, Michael Brady.</p>
				<p>Every man, woman, or child on the Ridge knew Michael. His lean figure in shabby blue dungarees, faded shirt, and weathered felt hat, with no more than a few threads of its band left, was as familiar as any tree, shed, or dump on the fields. He walked with a slight stoop, a pipe in his mouth always, his head bent as though he were thinking hard; but there was no hard thought in his eyes, only meditativeness, and a faint smile if he were stopped and spoken to unexpectedly.</p>
				<p>“You’re a regular ’cyclopaedia, Michael,” the men said sometimes when he, had given information on a subject they were discussing.</p>
				<p>“Not me,” Michael would reply as often as not. “I just came across that in a book I was reading the other day.”</p>
				<p>Ridge folk were proud of Michael’s books, and strangers who saw his miscellaneous collection⁠—mostly of cheap editions, old school books, and shilling, sixpenny, and penny publications of literary masterpieces, poetry, and works on industrial and religious subjects⁠—did not wonder that it impressed Ridge folk, or that Michael’s knowledge of the world and affairs was what it was. He had tracts, leaflets, and small books on almost every subject under the sun. Books were regarded as his weakness, and, remembering it, some of the men, when they had struck opal and left the town, occasionally sent a box of any old books they happened to come across to Michael, knowing that a printed page was a printed page to him in the long evenings when he lay on the sofa under his window. Michael himself had spent all the money he could, after satisfying the needs of his everyday life, on those tracts, pamphlets, and cheap books he hoarded in his hut on shelves made from wooden boxes and old fruit-cases.</p>
				<p>But there was nothing of the schoolmaster about him. He rarely gave information unless he was asked for it. The men appreciated that, although they were proud of his erudition and books. They knew dimly but surely that Michael used his books for, not against, themselves; and he was attached to books and learning, chiefly for what they could do for them, his mates. In all community discussions his opinion carried considerable weight. A matter was often talked over with more or less heat, differences of opinion thrashed out while Michael smoked and listened, weighing the arguments. He rarely spoke until his view was asked for. Then in a couple of minutes he would straighten out the subject of controversy, show what was to be said for and against a proposition, sum up, and give his conclusions, for or against it.</p>
				<p>Michael Brady, however, was much more the general utility man than encyclopaedia of Fallen Star Ridge. If a traveller⁠—swagman⁠—died on the road, it was Michael who saw he got a decent burial; Michael who was sent for if a man had his head smashed in a brawl, or a wife died unexpectedly. He was the court of final appeal in quarrels and disagreements between mates; and once when Martha M’Cready was away in Sydney, he had even brought a baby into the world. He was something of a dentist, too, honorary dentist to anyone on the Ridge who wanted a tooth pulled out; and the friend of any man, woman, or child in distress.</p>
				<p>And he did things so quietly, so much as a matter of course, that people did not notice what he did for them, or for the rest of the Ridge. They took it for granted he liked doing what he did; that he liked helping them. It was his sympathy, the sense of his oneness with all their lives, and his shy, whimsical humour and innate refusal to be anything more than they were, despite his books and the wisdom with which they were quite willing to credit him, that gained for Michael the regard of the people of the Ridge, and made him the unconscious power he was in the community.</p>
				<p>Of about middle height, and sparely built, Michael was forty-five, or thereabouts, when <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Rouminof died. He looked older, yet had the vigour and energy of a much younger man. Crowsfeet had gathered at the corners of his eyes, and there were the fines beneath them which all back-country men have from screwing their sight against the brilliant sunshine of the northwest. But the white of his eyes was as clear as the shell of a bird’s egg, the irises grey, flecked with hazel and green, luminous, and ringed with fine black lines. When he pushed back his hat, half a dozen lines from frowning against the glare were on his forehead too. His thin, black hair, streaked with grey, lay flat across and close to his head. He had a well-shaped nose and the sensitive nostrils of a thoroughbred, although Michael himself said he was no breed to speak of, but plain Australian⁠—and proud of it. His father was born in the country, and so was his mother. His father had been a teemster, and his mother a storekeeper’s daughter. Michael had wandered from one mining field to another in his young days. He had worked in Bendigo and Gippsland; later in Silver Town; and from the Barrier Ranges had migrated to Chalk Cliffs, and from the Cliffs to Fallen Star Ridge. He had been one of the first comers to the Ridge when opal was discovered there.</p>
				<p>The Rouminofs had been on Chalk Cliffs too, and had come to the Ridge in the early days of the rush. Paul had set up at the Cliffs as an opal buyer, it was said; but he knew very little about opal. Anybody could sell him a stone for twice as much as it was worth, and he could never get a price from other buyers for the stones he bought. He soon lost any money he possessed, and had drifted and swung with the careless life of the place. He had worked as a gouger for a while when the blocks were bought up. Then when the rush to the Ridge started, and most of the men tramped north to try their luck on the new fields, he went with them; and <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Rouminof and Sophie followed a little later on Ed Ventry’s bullock wagon, when Ed was taking stores to the rush.</p>
				<p><abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Rouminof had lived in a hut at the Old Town even after the township was moved to the eastern slope of the Ridge. She had learnt a good deal about opal on the Cliffs, and soon after she came to the Ridge set up a cutting-wheel, and started cutting and polishing stones. Several of the men brought her their stones, and after a while she was so good at her work that she often added a couple of pounds to the value of a stone. She kept a few goats too, to assure a means of livelihood when there was no opal about, and she sold goats’ milk and butter in the township. She had never depended on Rouminof to earn a living, which was just as well, Fallen Star folk agreed, since, as long as they had known him, he had never done so. For a long time he had drifted between the mines and Newton’s, cadging drinks or borrowing money from anybody who would lend to him. Sometimes he did odd jobs at Newton’s or the mail stables for the price of a few drinks; but no man who knew him would take up a claim, or try working a mine with him.</p>
				<p>His first mate on the Ridge had been Pony-Fence Inglewood. They sank a hole on a likely spot behind the Old Town; but Paul soon got tired of it. When they had not seen anything but bony potch for a while, Paul made up his mind there was nothing in the place. Pony-Fence rather liked it. He was for working a little longer, but to oblige his mate he agreed to sink again. Soon after they had started, Paul began to appear at the dump when the morning was half through, or not at all. Or, as often as not, when he did decide to sling a pick, or dig a bit, he groaned so about the pains in his back or his head that as often as not Pony-Fence told him to go home and get the missus to give him something for it.</p>
				<p>The mildest man on the fields, Pony-Fence Inglewood did not discover for some time what the boys said was correct. There was nothing the matter with Rum-Enough but a dislike of shifting mullock if he could get anyone to shift it for him. When he did discover he was doing the work of the firm, Pony-Fence and Paul had it out with each other, and parted company. Pony-Fence took a new mate, Bully Bryant, a youngster from Budda, who was anxious to put any amount of elbow grease into his search for a fortune, and Paul drifted. He had several mates afterwards, newcomers to the fields, who wanted someone to work with them, but they were all of the same opinion about him.</p>
				<p>“Tell Rum-Enough there’s a bit of colour about, and he’ll work like a chow,” they said; “but if y’ don’t see anything for a day or two, he goes as flat as the day before yesterday.”</p>
				<p>If he had been working, and happened on a knobby, or a bit of black potch with a light or two in it, Paul was like a child, crazy with happiness. He could talk of nothing else. He thought of nothing else. He slung his pick and shovelled dirt as long as you would let him, with a devouring impatience, in a frenzy of eagerness. The smallest piece of stone with no more than sun-flash was sufficient to put him in a state of frantic excitement.</p>
				<p>Strangers to the Ridge sometimes wanted to know whether Rouminof had ever had a touch of the sun. But Ridge folk knew he was not mad. He had the opal fever all right, they said, but he was not mad.</p>
				<p>When Jun Johnson blew along at the end of one summer and could not get anyone to work with him, he took Paul on. The two chummed up and started to sink a hole together, and the men made bets as to the chance of their ever getting ten or a dozen feet below ground; but before long they were astounded to see the old saw of setting a thief to catch a thief working true in this instance. If anybody was loafing on the new claim, it was not Rouminof. He did every bit of his share of the first day’s hard pick work and shovelling. If anybody was slacking, it was Jun rather than Paul. Jun kept his mate’s nose to the grindstone, and worked more successfully with him than anyone else had ever done. He knew it, too, and was proud of his achievement. Joking over it at Newton’s in the evening, he would say:</p>
				<p>“Great mate I’ve got now! Work? Never saw a chow work like him! Work his fingers to the bone, he would, if I’d let him. It’s a great life, a gouger’s, if only you’ve got the right sort of mate!”</p>
				<p>Ordinarily, of course, mates shared their finds. There was no question of what partners would get out of the luck of one or the other. But Jun⁠—he had his own little way of doing business, everybody knew. He had been on the Ridge before. He and his mate did not have any sensational luck, but they had saved up two or three packets of opal and taken them down to Sydney to sell. Old Bill Olsen was his mate then, and, although Bill had said nothing of the business, the men guessed there had been something shady about it. Jun had his own story of what happened. He said the old chap had “got on his ear” in Sydney, and that “a couple of spielers had rooked him of his stones.” But Bill no longer noticed Jun if they passed each other on the same track on the Ridge, and Jun pretended to be sore about it.</p>
				<p>“It’s dirt,” he said, “the old boy treating me as if I had anything to do with his bad luck losin’ those stones!”</p>
				<p>“Why don’t you speak to him about it?” somebody asked.</p>
				<p>“Oh, we had it out in Sydney,” Jun replied, “and it’s no good raking the whole thing up again. Begones is bygones⁠—that’s my motto. But if any man wants to have a grudge against me, well, let him. It’s a free country. That’s all I’ve got to say. Besides, the poor old cuss isn’t all there, perhaps.”</p>
				<p>“Don’t you fret,” Michael had said, “he’s all right. He’s got as much there as you or me, or any of us for that matter.”</p>
				<p>“Oh well, you know, Michael,” Jun declared. He was not going to quarrel with Michael Brady. “What you say goes, anyhow!”</p>
				<p>That was how Jun established himself anywhere. He had an easy, plausible, good-natured way. All the men laughed and drank with him and gave him grudging admiration, notwithstanding the threads and shreds of resentments and distrusts which old stories of his dealings, even with mates, had put in their minds. None of those stories had been proved against him, his friends said, Charley Heathfield among them. That was a fact. But there were too many of them to be good for any man’s soul, Ridge men, who took Jun with a grain of salt, thought⁠—Michael Brady, George Woods, Archie Cross, and Watty Frost among them; but Charley Heathfield, Michael’s mate, had struck up a friendship with Jun since his return to the Ridge.</p>
				<p>George Woods and the Crosses said it was a case of birds of a feather, but they did not say that to Michael. They knew Michael had the sort of affection for Charley that a man has for a dog he has saved from drowning.</p>
				<p>Charley Heathfield had been down on his luck when he went to the Ridge, his wife and a small boy with him; and the rush which he had expected to bring him a couple of hundred pounds’ worth of opal at least, if it did not make his fortune, had left him worse off than it found him⁠—a piece of debris in its wake. He and Rouminof had put down a shaft together, and as neither of them, after the first few weeks, did any more work than they could help, and were drunk or quarrelling half of their time, nothing came of their efforts.</p>
				<p>Charley, when his wife died, was ill himself, and living in a hut a few yards from Michael’s. She had been a waitress in a city restaurant, and he had married her, he said, because she could carry ten dishes of hot soup on one arm and four trays on the other. A tall, stolid, pale-faced woman, she had hated the back-country and her husband’s sense of humour, and had fretted herself to death rather than endure them. Charley had no particular opinion of himself or of her. He called his youngster Potch⁠—“a little bit of Potch,” he said, because the kid would never be anything better than poor opal at the best of times.</p>
				<p>Michael had nursed Charley while he was ill during that winter, and had taken him in hand when he was well enough to get about again. Charley was supposed to have weak lungs; but better food, steady habits, and the fine, dry air of a mild summer set him up wonderfully. Snowshoes had worked with Michael for a long time; he said that he was getting too old for the everyday toil of the mine, though, when Michael talked of taking on Charley to work with them. It would suit him all right if Michael found another mate. Michael and Charley Heathfield had worked together ever since, and Snowshoes had made his living as far as anybody knew by noodling on the dumps.</p>
				<p>But Charley and Michael had not come on a glimmer of opal worth speaking of for nearly twelve months. They were hanging on to their claim, hoping each day they would strike something good. There is a superstition among the miners that luck often changes when it seems at its worst. Both Charley and Michael had storekeeper’s accounts as long as their arms, and the men knew if their luck did not change soon, one or the other of them would have to go over to Warria, or to one of the other stations, and earn enough money there to keep the other going on the claim.</p>
				<p>They had no doubt it would be Michael who would have to go. Charley was not fond of work, and would be able to loaf away his time very pleasantly on the mine, making only a pretence of doing anything, until Michael returned. They wondered why Michael did not go and get a move into his affairs at once. Paul and Sophie might have something to do with his putting off going, they told each other; Michael was anxious how Paul and his luck would fare when it was a question of squaring up with Jun, and as to how the squaring up, when it came, would affect Sophie.</p>
				<p>Some of them had been concerning themselves on Paul’s account also. They did not like a good deal they had seen of the way Jun was using Paul, and they had resolved to see he got fair play when it was time for a settlement of his and Jun’s account. George Woods, Watty Frost, and Bill Grant went along to talk the matter over with Michael one evening, and found him fixing a shed at the back of the hut which he and Potch had put up for Sophie and her father, a few yards from Charley Heathfield’s, and in line with Michael’s own hut at the old Flash-in-the-Pan rush.</p>
				<p>“Paul says he’s going away if he gets a good thing out of his and Jun’s find,” George Woods said.</p>
				<p>“It’ll be a good thing⁠—if he gets a fair deal,” Michael replied.</p>
				<p>“He’ll get that⁠—if we can fix it,” Watty Frost said.</p>
				<p>“Yes,” Michael agreed.</p>
				<p>“Can’t think why you’re taking so much trouble with this place if Paul and Sophie are going away soon, Michael,” George Woods remarked at the end of their talk.</p>
				<p>“They’re not gone yet,” Michael said, and went on fastening a sapling across the brushwood he had laid over the roof of the shed.</p>
				<p>The men laughed. They knew Paul well enough to realise that there was no betting on what he would or would not do. They understood Michael did not approve of his plans for Sophie. Nobody did. But what was to be done? If Paul had the money and got the notion into his head that it would be a good thing to go away, Sophie and he would probably go away. But the money would not last, people thought; then Sophie and her father would come back to the Ridge again, or Michael would go to look for them. Being set adrift on the world with no one to look after her would be hard on Sophie, it was agreed, but nobody saw how Rouminof was to be prevented from taking her away if he wanted to.</p>
			</section>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
