<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-AU">
	<head>
		<title epub:type="z3998:roman">X</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section data-parent="part-1" id="chapter-1-10" epub:type="chapter">
			<h3 epub:type="title z3998:roman ordinal">X</h3>
			<p>“<abbr>Mr.</abbr> Armitage is up at Newton’s!” Paul yelled to Michael, when he saw him at his back door a few minutes after Sophie had given him the news.</p>
			<p>“Not the old man?” Michael inquired.</p>
			<p>“No, the young ’un.”</p>
			<p>Word was quickly bruited over the fields that the American, one of the best buyers who came to the Ridge, had arrived by the evening coach. He invariably had a good deal of money to spend, and gave a better price than most of the local buyers.</p>
			<p>Dawe <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">P.</abbr> Armitage had visited Fallen Star Ridge from the first year of its existence as an opal field, and every year for years after that. But when he began to complain about aches and pains in his bones, which he refused to allow anybody to call rheumatism, and was assured he was well over seventy and that the long rail and sea journey from New York City to Fallen Star township were getting too much for him, he let his son, whom he had made a partner in his business, make the journey for him. John Lincoln Armitage had been going to the Ridge for two or three years, and although the men liked him well enough, he was not as popular with them as his father had been. And the old man, John Armitage said, although he was nearly crippled with rheumatism, still grudged him his yearly visit to the Ridge, and hated like poison letting anyone else do his opal-buying.</p>
			<p>Dawe Armitage had bought some of the best black opal found on the Ridge. He had been a hard man to deal with, but the men had a grudging admiration for him, a sort of fellow feeling of affection because of his oneness with them in a passion for black opal. A grim, sturdy old beggar, there was a certain quality about him, a gruff humour, sheer doggedness, strength of purpose, and dead honesty within his point of view, which kept an appreciative and kindly feeling for him in their hearts. They knew he had preyed on them; but he had done it bluntly, broadly, and in such an off-with-the-gloves-lads-style, that, after a good fight over a stone and price, they had sometimes given in to him for sheer amusement, and to let him have the satisfaction of thinking he had gained his point.</p>
			<p>Usually he set his price on a stone and would not budge from it. The gougers knew this, and if their price on a stone was not Dawe Armitage’s, they did not waste breath on argument, except to draw the old boy and get some diversion from his way of playing them. If a man had a good stone and did not think anyone else was likely to give him his figure, sometimes he sold ten minutes before the coach Armitage was going down to town by, left Newton’s. But, three or four times, when a stone had taken his fancy and a miner was obdurate, the old man, with his mind’s eye full of the stone and the fires in its dazzling jet, had suddenly sent for it and its owner, paid his price, and pocketed the stone. He had wrapped up the gem, chuckling in defeat, and rejoicing to have it at any price. As a rule he made three or four times as much as he had given for opals he bought on the Ridge, but to Dawe Armitage the satisfaction of making money on a transaction was nothing like the joy of putting a coveted treasure into his wallet and driving off from Fallen Star with it.</p>
			<p>A gem merchant of considerable standing in the United States, Dawe Armitage’s collection of opals was world famous. He had put black opal on the market, and had been the first to extol the splendour of the stones found on Fallen Star Ridge. So different they were from the opal found on Chalk Cliffs, or in any other part of the world, with the fires in jetty potch rather than in the clear or milky medium people were accustomed to, that at first timid and conventional souls were disturbed and repelled by them. “They felt,” they said, “that there was something occultly evil about black opal.” They had a curious fear and dread of the stones as talismans of evil. Dawe Armitage scattered the quakers like chaff with his scorn. They could not, he said, accept the magnificent pessimism of black opal. They would not rejoice with pagan abandonment in the beauty of those fires in black opal, realising that, like the fires of life, they owed their brilliance, their transcendental glory, to the dark setting. But every day the opals made worshippers of sightseers. They mesmerised beholders who came to look at them.</p>
			<p>When the coach rattled to a standstill outside the hotel, Peter Newton went to the door of the bar. He knew John Armitage by the size and shape of his dust-covered overalls. Armitage dismounted and pulled off his gloves. Peter Newton went to meet him.</p>
			<p>Armitage gripped his hand.</p>
			<p>“Mighty glad to see you, Newton,” he said, “and glad to see the Ridge again. How are you all?”</p>
			<p>Newton smiled, giving him greeting in downright Ridge style.</p>
			<p>“Fine,” he said. “Glad to see you, <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Armitage.”</p>
			<p>When he got indoors, Armitage threw off his coat. He and Peter had a drink together, and then he went to have a wash and brush up before dinner. <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Newton came from the kitchen; she was pleased to see <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Armitage, she said, and he shook hands with her and made her feel that he was really quite delighted to see her. She spent a busy hour or so making the best of her preparations for the evening meal, so that he might repeat his usual little compliments about her cooking. Armitage had his dinner in a small private sitting-room, and strolled out afterwards to the veranda to smoke and yarn with the men.</p>
			<p>He spent the evening with them there, and in the bar, hearing the news of the Ridge and gossiping genially. He had come all the way from Sydney the day before, spent the night in the train, and had no head for business that night, he said. When he yarned with them, Fallen Star men had a downright sense of liking John Armitage. He was a good sort, they told each other; they appreciated his way of talking, and laughed over the stories he told and the rare and racy Americanisms with which he flavoured his speech for their benefit.</p>
			<p>When he exerted himself to entertain and amuse them, they were as pleased with him as a pack of women. And John Lincoln Armitage pleased women, men of the Ridge guessed, the women of his own kind as well as the women of Fallen Star who had talked to him now and then. His eyes had a mild caress when they rested on a woman; it was not in the least offensive, but carried challenge and appeal⁠—a suggestion of sympathy. He had a thousand little courtesies for women, the deference which comes naturally to “a man of the world” for a member of “the fair sex.” <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Newton was always flattered and delighted after a talk with him. He asked her advice about opals he had bought or was going to buy, and, although he did not make use of it very often, she was always pleased by his manner of asking. <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> George Woods and <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Archie Cross both confessed to a partiality for <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Armitage, and even <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Watty agreed that he was “a real nice man”; and when he was in the township <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Henty and one of the girls usually drove over from the station and took him back to Warria to stay a day or two before he went back to Sydney on his return journey to New York.</p>
			<p>Armitage was very keen to know whether there had been any sensational finds on the Ridge during the year, and all about them. He wanted to know who had been getting good stuff, and said that he had bought Jun’s stones in Sydney. The men exclaimed at that.</p>
			<p>“I was surprised to hear,” John Armitage said, “what happened to the other parcel. You don’t mean to say you think Charley Heathfield⁠—?”</p>
			<p>“We ain’t tried him yet,” Watty remarked cautiously, “but the evidence is all against him.”</p>
			<p>Rouminof thrust himself forward, eager to tell his story. Realising the proud position he might have been in this night with the opal-buyer if he had had his opals, tears gathered in his eyes as he went over it all again.</p>
			<p>Armitage listened intently.</p>
			<p>“Well, of all the rotten luck!” he exclaimed, when Paul had finished. “Have another whisky, Rouminof? But what I can’t make out,” he added, “is why, if he had the stones, Charley didn’t come to me with them.⁠ ⁠… I didn’t buy anything but Jun’s stuff before I came up here⁠ ⁠… and he just said it was half the find he was showing me. Nice bit of pattern in that big black piece, eh? If Charley had the stones, you’d think he’d ’ve come along to me, or got Jun, or somebody to come along for him.⁠ ⁠…”</p>
			<p>“I don’t know about that.” George Woods felt for his reasons. “He wouldn’t want you⁠—or anybody else to know he’d got them.”</p>
			<p>“That’s right,” Watty agreed.</p>
			<p>“He’s got them all right,” Ted Cross declared. “You see, I seen him taking Rummy home that night⁠—and he cleared out next morning.”</p>
			<p>“I guess you boys know best.” John Armitage sipped his whisky thoughtfully. “But I’m mad to get the rest of the stones. Tell you the truth, the old man hasn’t been too pleased with my buying lately⁠ ⁠… and it would put him in no end of a good humour if I could take home with me another packet of gems like the one I got from Jun. Jun knew I was keen to get the stones⁠ ⁠… and I can’t help thinking⁠ ⁠… if he knew they were about, he’d put me in the way of getting them⁠ ⁠… or them in my way⁠—somehow. You don’t think⁠ ⁠… anybody else could have been on the job, and⁠ ⁠… put it over on Charley, say.⁠ ⁠…”</p>
			<p>His eyes went over the faces of the men lounging against the bar, or standing in groups about him. Michael was lifting his glass to drink, and, for the fraction of a second the opal-buyer’s glance wavered on his face before it passed on.</p>
			<p>“Not likely,” George Woods said dryly.</p>
			<p>Recognising the disfavour his suggestion raised, Armitage brushed it aside.</p>
			<p>“I don’t think so, of course,” he said.</p>
			<p>And although he did not speak to him, or even look at him closely again, John Armitage was thinking all the evening of the quiver, slight as the tremor of a moth’s wing, on Michael’s face, when that inquiry had been thrown out.</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
