<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-AU">
	<head>
		<title>XVIII</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section data-parent="part-2" id="chapter-2-18" epub:type="chapter">
			<h3 epub:type="z3998:ordinal z3998:roman">XVIII</h3>
			<p>The men met to talk about Michael next evening. The meeting was informal, but every man on the fields had come to Fallen Star for it. The hall was filled to the doors as it had been the night before, but the crowd had none of the elastic excitement and fighting spirit, the antagonisms and enthusiasms, which had gone off from it in wavelike vibrations the night before. News of Arthur Henty‚Äôs death had left everybody aghast, and awakened realisation of the abysses which even a life that seemed to move easily could contain. The shock of it was on everybody; the solemnity it had created in the air.</p>
			<p>George Woods, elected spokesman for the men, and Roy O‚ÄôMara deputed to take notes of the meeting because he was reckoned to be a good penman, sat at a table on the platform. Michael took a chair just below the platform, facing the men. He was there to answer questions. No one had asked him to be present, but it was the custom when men of the Ridge were holding an inquiry of the sort for the man or men concerned to have seats in front of the platform, and Michael had gone to sit there as soon as the men were in their places.</p>
			<p>‚ÄúThis isn‚Äôt like any other inquiry we‚Äôve had on the Ridge,‚Äù George Woods said. ‚ÄúYou chaps know how I feel about it‚ÅÝ‚ÄîI told you last night. But Michael was for it, and I take it he‚Äôs come here to answer any questions‚ÅÝ‚Ää‚ÅÝ‚Ä¶ and to clear this thing up once and for all.‚ÅÝ‚Ää‚ÅÝ‚Ä¶ He‚Äôs put his case to you. He says he‚Äôll stand by what you say‚ÅÝ‚Äîthe judgment of his mates.‚Äù</p>
			<p>Anxious to spare Michael another recital of what had happened, he went on:</p>
			<p>‚ÄúThere‚Äôs no need for Michael to repeat what he said last night. If there‚Äôs any man here wasn‚Äôt in the hall, these are the facts.‚Äù</p>
			<p>He repeated the story Michael had told, steadily, clearly, and impartially.</p>
			<p>‚ÄúIf there‚Äôs any man wants to ask a question on those facts, he can do it now.‚Äù</p>
			<p>George sat down, and M‚ÄôGinnis was on his feet the same instant; his bat-like ears twitching, his shoulders hunched, his whole tall, thin frame strung to the pitch of nervous animosity.</p>
			<p>‚ÄúI want to know,‚Äù he said, ‚Äúwhat reason there is for believing a word of it. Michael Brady‚Äôs as good as admitted he‚Äôs been fooling you for goodness knows how long, and I don‚Äôt see‚ÅÝ‚Äî‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúY‚Äô soon will, y‚Äôr bleedin‚Äô, blasted, flyblown fool,‚Äù Bully Bryant roared, rising and pushing back his sleeves.</p>
			<p>‚ÄúSit down, Bull,‚Äù George Woods called.</p>
			<p>‚ÄúThe question is,‚Äù he added, ‚Äúwhat reason is there for believing what Michael says?‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúHis word‚Äôs enough,‚Äù somebody called.</p>
			<p>‚ÄúSome of us think so,‚Äù George said. ‚ÄúBut there‚Äôs some don‚Äôt. Is there anyone else can say, Michael?‚Äù</p>
			<p>Michael shook his head. He thought of Snowshoes, but the old man had refused to be present at the inquiry or to have anything to do with it. He had pretended to be deaf when he was asked anything about Paul‚Äôs opals. And Michael, who could only surmise that Snowshoes‚Äô reasons for having taken the stones in a measure resembled his own when he took them from Paul, would not have him put to the torture of questioning.</p>
			<p>George had said: ‚ÄúIt might make a lot of difference to Michael if you‚Äôd come along, <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr>¬ÝRiley.‚Äù</p>
			<p>But Snowshoes had marched off from him as if he had not heard anyone speak, his blue eyes fixed on that invisible goal he was always gazing at and going towards.</p>
			<p>George had not seen him come into the hall; but when he was needed, his tall figure, white clad and straight as a dead tree, rose at the back of the hall.</p>
			<p>‚ÄúIt‚Äôs true,‚Äù he said. ‚ÄúI wanted to be sure of Michael; I shadowed him. I saw him with the stones when he says. I did not see him with them any other time.‚Äù</p>
			<p>He sat down again; his eyes, which had flashed, resumed their steady, distant stare; his features relapsed into their mask of impassivity.</p>
			<p>M‚ÄôGinnis sprang to his feet again.</p>
			<p>‚ÄúThat‚Äôs all very well,‚Äù he cried, sticking to his question. ‚ÄúBut it‚Äôs not my idea of evidence. It wouldn‚Äôt stand in any law court in the country. Snowshoes‚ÅÝ‚Äî‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúShut up!‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúSit down!‚Äù</p>
			<p>Half a dozen voices growled.</p>
			<p>Because of the respect and affection they had for him, and because of a certain aloof dignity he had with them, no man on the Ridge ever addressed Snowshoes as anything but <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr>¬ÝRiley. They resented M‚ÄôGinnis calling him ‚ÄúSnowshoes‚Äù to his face, and guessed that he had been going to say something which would reflect on Snowshoes‚Äô reliability as a witness. They admitted his eccentricity; but they would not admit that his mental peculiarities amounted to more than that. Above all, they were not going to have his feelings hurt by this outsider from the Punti rush.</p>
			<p>Broad-shouldered, square and solid, Bill Grant towered above the men about him. ‚ÄúThis doesn‚Äôt pretend to be a court of law, Mister M‚ÄôGinnis,‚Äù he remarked, with an irony and emphasis which never failed of their mark when he used them, although he rarely did, and only once or twice had been heard to speak, at any gathering. ‚ÄúIt‚Äôs an inquiry by men of the Ridge into the doings of one of their mates. What they want to know is the rights of this business‚ÅÝ‚Ää‚ÅÝ‚Ä¶ and what you consider evidence doesn‚Äôt matter. It‚Äôs what the men in this hall consider evidence matters. And, what‚Äôs more, I don‚Äôt see why you‚Äôre butting into our affairs so much: you‚Äôre not one of us‚ÅÝ‚Äîyou‚Äôre a newcomer. You‚Äôve only been a year or so in the place‚ÅÝ‚Ää‚ÅÝ‚Ä¶ and this concerns only men of the Ridge, who stand by the Ridge ways of doing things.‚ÅÝ‚Ää‚ÅÝ‚Ä¶ Michael‚Äôs here to be judged by his mates‚ÅÝ‚Ää‚ÅÝ‚Ä¶ not by you and your sort.‚ÅÝ‚Ää‚ÅÝ‚Ä¶ If you‚Äôd the brain of a louse, you‚Äôd understand‚ÅÝ‚Äîthis isn‚Äôt a question of law, but of principle‚ÅÝ‚Äîhonour, if you like to call it that.‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúDoes the meeting consider the question answered?‚Äù George Woods inquired when Bill Grant sat down.</p>
			<p>‚ÄúYes!‚Äù</p>
			<p>A chorus of voices intoned the answer.</p>
			<p>‚ÄúIf you believe Michael‚Äôs story, there‚Äôs nothing more to be said,‚Äù George continued. ‚ÄúDoes any man want to ask Michael a question?‚Äù</p>
			<p>No one replied for a moment. Then M‚ÄôGinnis exclaimed incoherently.</p>
			<p>‚ÄúShut up!‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúSit down!‚Äù</p>
			<p>Men cried out all over the hall.</p>
			<p>‚ÄúThat‚Äôs all, I think, Michael,‚Äù George said, looking down to where Michael sat before the platform; and Michael, pulling his hat further over his eyes, went out of the hall.</p>
			<p>It was the custom for men of the Ridge to talk over the subject of their inquiry together after the man or men with whom the meeting was concerned had left the hall, before giving their verdict.</p>
			<p>When Michael had gone, George Woods said:</p>
			<p>‚ÄúThe boys would like to hear what you‚Äôve got to say, I think, Archie.‚Äù</p>
			<p>He looked at Archie Cross. ‚ÄúYou and Michael haven‚Äôt been seein‚Äô eye to eye lately, and if there‚Äôs any other side in this business, it‚Äôs the side that lost confidence in Michael when we were fed-up with all that whispering. You know Michael, and you‚Äôre a good Ridge man, though you were ready to take on Armitage‚Äôs scheme. The boys‚Äôd like to hear what you‚Äôve got to say, I‚Äôm sure.‚Äù</p>
			<p>Archie Cross stood up; he rolled his hat in his hands. His face, hacked out of a piece of dull flesh, sun-reddened, moved convulsively; his hair was roughed-up from it; his small, sombre eyes went with straight lightnings to the men in the hall about him.</p>
			<p>‚ÄúIt‚Äôs true‚ÅÝ‚Äîwhat George says,‚Äù he said after a pause, as if it were difficult for him to express his thought. ‚ÄúI haven‚Äôt been seein‚Äô eye to eye with Michael lately‚ÅÝ‚Ää‚ÅÝ‚Ä¶ and I listened to all the dirty gossip that mob‚Äù‚ÅÝ‚Äîhe glanced towards M‚ÄôGinnis and the men with him‚ÅÝ‚Äî‚Äúput round about him. It was part that‚ÅÝ‚Ää‚ÅÝ‚Ä¶ and part listening to their talk about money invested here making all the difference to Fallen Star‚ÅÝ‚Ää‚ÅÝ‚Ä¶ and the children growing up‚ÅÝ‚Ää‚ÅÝ‚Ä¶ and gettin‚Äô scared and worried about seein‚Äô them through‚ÅÝ‚Ää‚ÅÝ‚Ä¶ made me go agin you boys lately, and let that lot get hold of me.‚ÅÝ‚Ää‚ÅÝ‚Ä¶ But this business about Michael‚Äôs shown me where I am. Michael‚Äôs stood for one thing all through‚ÅÝ‚Äîthe Ridge and the hanging on to the mines for us.‚ÅÝ‚Ää‚ÅÝ‚Ä¶ He‚Äôs been a better Ridge man than I have.‚ÅÝ‚Ää‚ÅÝ‚Ä¶ And I want to say‚ÅÝ‚Ää‚ÅÝ‚Ä¶ as far as I‚Äôm concerned, Michael‚Äôs proved himself.‚ÅÝ‚Ää‚ÅÝ‚Ä¶ I don‚Äôt reck‚Äôn hanging on to opals was anything‚ÅÝ‚Ää‚ÅÝ‚Ä¶ no more does Ted. It‚Äôs the sort of thing a chap like Michael‚Äôd do absentminded‚ÅÝ‚Ää‚ÅÝ‚Ä¶ not noticin‚Äô what he was doin‚Äô; but when he did notice‚ÅÝ‚Äîand got scared thinkin‚Äô where he was gettin‚Äô to, and what it might look like, he couldn‚Äôt get rid of ‚Äôem quick, enough. That‚Äôs what I think, and that‚Äôs what Ted thinks, too. He hasn‚Äôt got the gift of the gab, Ted, or he‚Äôd say so himself.‚ÅÝ‚Ää‚ÅÝ‚Ä¶ If there‚Äôs goin‚Äô to be opposition to Michael, it‚Äôs not comin‚Äô from us.‚ÅÝ‚Ää‚ÅÝ‚Ä¶ And we‚Äôve made up our minds we stand by the Ridge.‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúGood old Archie!‚Äù somebody shouted.</p>
			<p>‚ÄúWhat have you got to say, Roy?‚Äù George Woods faced his secretary who had been scratching diligently throughout the meeting. ‚ÄúYou‚Äôve been more with the M‚ÄôGinnis lot, too, than with us, lately.‚Äù</p>
			<p>Roy flushed and sprang to his feet.</p>
			<p>‚ÄúI‚Äôm in the same boat with Archie and Ted,‚Äù he said. ‚ÄúExcept about the family‚ÅÝ‚Ää‚ÅÝ‚Ä¶ mine isn‚Äôt so big yet as it might be. But it‚Äôs a fact, I funked, not having had much luck lately.‚ÅÝ‚Ää‚ÅÝ‚Ä¶ But if ever I go back on the Ridge again‚ÅÝ‚Ää‚ÅÝ‚Ä¶ may the lot of you go back on me.‚Äù</p>
			<p>Exclamations of approbation and goodwill reverberated as Roy subsided into his chair again.</p>
			<p>‚ÄúThat‚Äôs all there is to be said on the subject, I think,‚Äù George Woods remarked.</p>
			<p>‚ÄúMichael wanted his mates to know what he had done‚ÅÝ‚Äîand why he had done it. He‚Äôs asked for judgment from his mates.‚ÅÝ‚Ää‚ÅÝ‚Ä¶ If he‚Äôd wanted to go back on us he could have done it; he could have done it quite easy. Armitage would have shut up on his suspicions about the stones. Charley could have been bought. Michael need never ‚Äôve faced all this as far as I can see‚ÅÝ‚Ää‚ÅÝ‚Ä¶ but he decided to face it rather than give up all we‚Äôve been fightin‚Äô for here. He‚Äôd rather take all the dirt we care to sling at him than anything they could give him‚ÅÝ‚Ää‚ÅÝ‚Ä¶ and that‚Äôs why M‚ÄôGinnis has been up against him like he has. Michael has queered his pitch, and most of us have a notion that M‚ÄôGinnis has been here to do Armitage‚Äôs work‚ÅÝ‚Ää‚ÅÝ‚Ä¶ work up discontent and ill-feeling amongst us, and split our ranks; and he came very near doing it. If Michael hadn‚Äôt ‚Äôve stood by us, like he‚Äôs always done, we‚Äôd have the Armitage Syndicate on our backs by now.‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúTo tell you the truth, boys,‚Äù George went on, after a moment‚Äôs hesitation, and then as if the impulse to speak a secret thought were too strong for him, ‚ÄúI‚Äôve always thought Michael was too good. And if those stones did get hold of him for a couple of weeks, like he says, all it proves, as far as I can see, is that Michael isn‚Äôt any plaster saint, but a man like the rest of us.‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúThat‚Äôs right!‚Äù Watty called, and several men shouted after him.</p>
			<p>Pony-Fence moved out from the crowd he was sitting with.</p>
			<p>‚ÄúI vote this meeting records a motion of confidence in Michael Brady,‚Äù he said. ‚ÄúAnd when we call Michael in again we‚Äôd ought to make it clear to him‚ÅÝ‚Ää‚ÅÝ‚Ä¶ that so far from its being a question of not having as much confidence in him as we had before‚ÅÝ‚Äîwe‚Äôve got more. Michael‚Äôs stood by his mates if ever a man did.‚ÅÝ‚Ää‚ÅÝ‚Ä¶ He‚Äôs come to us‚ÅÝ‚Ää‚ÅÝ‚Ä¶ he‚Äôs given himself up to us. He‚Äôll stand by what we say or do about him. And what are we goin‚Äô to do? Are we goin‚Äô to turn him down‚ÅÝ‚Ää‚ÅÝ‚Ä¶ read him a bit of a lecture and tell him to go home and be a good boy and not do it another time‚ÅÝ‚Ää‚ÅÝ‚Ä¶ or are we going to let him know once and for all what we think of him?‚Äù</p>
			<p>Exclamations of agreement went up in a rabble of voices.</p>
			<p>Bully Bryant rose from one of the back forms with a grin which illuminated the building.</p>
			<p>‚ÄúI‚Äôll second that motion,‚Äù he said, pushing back the sleeve on his left arm. ‚ÄúAnd his own mother won‚Äôt know the man who says a word against it‚ÅÝ‚Äîwhen I‚Äôve done with him.‚Äù</p>
			<p>Watty was sent to bring Michael back to the meeting. They walked to the end of the hall together; and George Woods told Michael as quietly as he could for his own agitation, and the joy which, welling in him, impeded his speech, that men of the Ridge found nothing to censure in what he had done. His mates believed in him; they stood by him. They were prepared to stand by him as he had stood by the Ridge always. The meeting wished to record a vote of confidence.‚ÅÝ‚Ää‚ÅÝ‚Ä¶</p>
			<p>Cheers roared to the roof. Michael, shaken by the storm of his emotion and gratitude, stood before the crowd in the hall with bowed head. When the storm was quieter in him, he lifted his head and looked out to the men, his eyes shining with tears.</p>
			<p>He could not speak; old mates closed round to shake hands with him before the meeting broke up. Every man grasped and wrung his hand, saying:</p>
			<p>‚ÄúGood luck! Good luck to you, Michael!‚Äù Or just grasped his hand and smiled with that assurance of fellowship and goodwill which meant more to Michael than anything else in the world.</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
