<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-AU">
	<head>
		<title>IX</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section data-parent="part-2" id="chapter-2-9" epub:type="chapter">
			<h3 epub:type="z3998:ordinal z3998:roman">IX</h3>
			<p>Tenders had been called for, to clear the course for the annual race meeting. A notice posted on the old, wild cherry tree in the road opposite Newton’s, brought men and boys from every rush on Fallen Star to Ezra Smith’s billiard-room on the night appointed; and Ezra, constituted foreman by the meeting, detailed parties to clear and roll the track.</p>
			<p>A paddock at the back of the town, with several tall coolebahs at one side, was known as the racecourse. A table placed a little out from the trees served for a judge’s box; and because the station folk usually drew up their buggies and picnicked there, the shade of the coolebahs was called the grandstand. Farther along a saddling-paddock had been fenced off, and in it, on race-days, were collected a miscellaneous muster of the show horses of the district⁠—rough-haired nags, piebald and skewbald; rusty, dusty, big-boned old racers with famous reputations; wild-eyed, unbroken youngsters, green from the plains; Warria chestnuts, graceful as greyhounds, with quivering, scarlet nostrils; and the nuggety, deep-chested offspring of the Langi-Eumina stallion Black Harry.</p>
			<p>People came from far and near for the races, and for the ball which was held the same evening in the big, iron-roofed shed opposite Newton’s. Newton’s was filled to the brim with visitors, and there were not stables enough for the horses. But Ridge stables are never more than railed yards about the size of a room, with bark thatches, and as many of them as were needed were run up for the occasion.</p>
			<p>Horses and horsemen were heroes of the occasion The merits of every horse that was going to run were argued; histories, points, pedigrees, and performances discussed. Stories were told of the doings of strange horses brought from distant selections, the outstations of Warria, Langi-Eumina, or Darrawingee; yarns swapped of almost mythical warrigals, and warrigal hunting, the breaking of buck-jumpers, the enterprises and exploits of famous horsemen. Ridge meetings, since the course had been made and the function had become a yearly fixture, were gone over; and the chances of every horse and rider entered for the next day debated, until anticipation and interest attained their highest pitch.</p>
			<p>Everybody in the township went to the races; everybody was expected to go. Race-day was the Ridge gala day; the day upon which men, women, and children gave themselves up to the wholehearted, joyous excitement of an outing. The meeting brought a bookmaker or two from Sydney sometimes, and sometimes a man in the town made a book on the event. But nobody, it was rumoured, looked forward to, or enjoyed the races more than <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Watty Frost, although she had begun by disapproving of them, and still maintained she did not “hold with betting.” She put up with it, however, so long as the Sydney men did not get away with Ridge money.</p>
			<p>Potch was disappointed, and so was Michael, that Sophie would not go to the races, which were held during the year of her return. They went, and Rouminof trotted off by himself, quite early. Sophie did not want to see all the strangers who would be in Fallen Star for race-day, she said⁠—people from the river selections, the stations, and country towns. Late in the afternoon, as she was going to see Ella Bryant, to offer to mind the baby while Ella and Bully went to the ball, she saw Martha was at home, a drift of smoke coming from the chimney of her hut.</p>
			<p>Sophie went to the back door of the hut and stood in the doorway.</p>
			<p>“Are you there, Martha?” she called.</p>
			<p>“That you, Sophie?” Martha queried. “Come in!”</p>
			<p>Sophie went into the kitchen. Martha had a big fire, and her room was full of its hot glare. She was ironing at a table against the wall, and freshly laundered, white clothes were hanging to a line stretched from above the window to a nail on the inner wall. She looked up happily as Sophie appeared, sweat streaming from her fat, jolly face.</p>
			<p>“I was just thinking of you, dearie,” she exclaimed, putting the iron on an upturned tin, and straightening out the flounces of the dress she was at work on. “Lovely day it’s been for the races, hasn’t it? Sit down. I’ll be done d’reckly, and am going to make a cup of tea before I go over to help <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Newton a bit with dinner. My, she’s got her hands full over there⁠—with all the crowd up!⁠ ⁠… Don’t think I ever did see such a crowd at the races, Sophie.”</p>
			<p>Martha’s iron flashed and swung backwards and forth. Sophie watched the brawny forearm which wielded the iron. Hard and as brown as the branch of a tree it was, from above the elbow where her sleeve was rolled back to the wrist; the hand fastened over the iron, red and dappled with great golden-brown freckles; the nails of its short, thick fingers, broken, dirt lying in thick, black wedges beneath them. As her other hand moved over the dress, preparing the way for the iron, Sophie saw its work-worn palm, the lines on it driven deep with scouring, scrubbing, and years of washing clothes, and cleaning other folks’ houses. She thought of the work those hands of Martha’s had done for Fallen Star; how Martha had looked after sick people, brought babies into the world, nursed the mothers, mended, washed, sewed, and darned, giving her help wherever it was needed. Always good-natured, hearty, healthy, and wholesome, what a wonderful woman she was, Mother M’Cready, Sophie exclaimed to herself.</p>
			<p>Martha was as excited as any girl on the Ridge, ironing her dress now, and getting ready for the ball. Sophie wondered how old she was. She did not look any older than when she first remembered her; but people said Martha must be sixty if she was a day. And she loved a dance, Sophie knew. She could dance, too, Mother M’Cready. The boys said she could dance like a two-year-old.</p>
			<p>“What are you going to wear to the ball, Sophie?” Martha asked. “I suppose you’ve got some real nice dresses you brought from America.”</p>
			<p>“I’m not going,” Sophie said,</p>
			<p>“Not going?” Martha’s iron came down with a bang, her blue eyes flashed wide with astonishment. “The idea! Not goin’ to the Ridge ball⁠—the first since you came home? I never heard of such a thing.⁠ ⁠… ‘Course you’re going, Sophie!”</p>
			<p>Sophie’s glance left Martha’s big, busy figure. It went through the open doorway. The sunshine was garish on the plains, although the afternoon was nearly over.</p>
			<p>“Why aren’t you goin’?” Martha pursued. “Why? What’ll your father say? And Michael? And Potch? We’d all been looking forward to seein’ you there like you used to be, Sophie. And⁠ ⁠… here was me doin’ up my dress extra special, thinkin’ Sophie’ll be that grand in the dresses she’s brought from America⁠ ⁠… we’ll all have to smarten a bit to keep up with her.⁠ ⁠…”</p>
			<p>Tears swam in Sophie’s eyes at the naive and genial admiration of what Martha had said.</p>
			<p>“It’ll spoil the ball if you’re not there,” Martha insisted, her iron flashing vigorously. “It just won’t be⁠—the ball⁠—and everything looking as if it were goin’ to be the biggest ball ever was on the Ridge. Everybody’ll be that disappointed⁠—”</p>
			<p>“Do you think they will, Martha?” Sophie queried.</p>
			<p>“I don’t think; I know.”</p>
			<p>A little smile, sceptical yet wistful, hovered in Sophie’s eyes.</p>
			<p>“And it don’t seem fair to Potch neither.”</p>
			<p>“Potch?”</p>
			<p>“Yes⁠ ⁠… you hidin’ yourself away as if you weren’t happy⁠—and going to marry the best lad in the country.” The iron came down emphatically, Martha working it as vigorously and intently as she was thinking.</p>
			<p>“There’s some says Potch isn’t a match for you now, Sophie. Not since you went away and got manners and all.⁠ ⁠… They can’t tell why you’re goin’ to marry Potch. But as I said to <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Watty the other day, I said: ‘Sophie isn’t like that. She isn’t like that at all. It’s the man she goes for, and Potch is good enough for a princess to take up with.’ That’s what I said; and I don’t mind who knows it.⁠ ⁠…”</p>
			<p>Sophie had got up and gone to the door while Martha was talking. She was amused at the idea of <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Watty having forgiven her sufficiently to think that Potch was not a good enough match for her.</p>
			<p>“Besides⁠ ⁠… I did want you to go, Sophie,” Martha continued. “They’re all coming over from Warria⁠—<abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> and <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Henty and the girls, and <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Arthur. They’ve got a party staying with them, up from Sydney⁠ ⁠… and most of them have put up at Newton’s for the night.⁠ ⁠…”</p>
			<p>She glanced at Sophie to see how she was taking this news. But no flicker of concern changed the thoughtful mask of Sophie’s features as she leaned in the doorway looking out to the blue fall of the afternoon sky.</p>
			<p>“They’re coming over to see how the natives of these parts amuse theirselves,” Martha declared scornfully. “They’ll have on all the fine dresses and things they buy down in Sydney⁠ ⁠… and I was lookin’ to you, Sophie, to keep up our end. I’ve been thinkin’ to meself, ‘They think they’re the salt of the earth, don’t they? Think they’re that smart⁠ ⁠… we dress so funny⁠ ⁠… and dance so funny, over at Fallen Star. But Sophie’ll show them; Sophie’ll take the shine out of them when they see her in one of the dresses she’s brought from America.’ ”</p>
			<p>As Martha talked, Sophie could see the ballroom at Warria as she had years before. She could see the people in it⁠—figures swaying down the long veranda, the Henty girls, <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Henty, Phyllis Chelmsford⁠—their faces, the dresses they had worn; Arthur, John Armitage, James Henty, herself, as she had sat behind the piano, or turned the pages of her father’s music. She could hear the music he and <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Henty played; the rhythm of a waltz swayed her. A twinge of the old wrath, hurt indignation, and disappointment, vibrated through her.⁠ ⁠… She smiled to think of it, and of all the long time which lay between that night and now.</p>
			<p>“I’d give anything for you to be there⁠—looking your best,” Martha continued. “I can’t bear that lot to think you’ve come home because you weren’t a success, as they say over there, or because.⁠ ⁠…”</p>
			<p>“<abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Armitage wasn’t as fond of me⁠—as he used to be,” Sophie murmured.</p>
			<p>Martha caught the mocking of a gleam in her eyes as she spoke. No one knew why Sophie had come home; but <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Newton had given Martha an American newspaper with a paragraph in it about Sophie. Martha had read and reread it, and given it to several other people to read. She put her iron on the hearth and disappeared into the bedroom which opened off her kitchen.</p>
			<p>“This is all I know about it, Sophie,” she said, returning with the paper.</p>
			<p>She handed the paper to Sophie, and Sophie glanced at a marked paragraph on its page.</p>
			<blockquote>
				<p>“Of a truth, dark are the ways of women, and mysterious beyond human understanding,” she read. “Probably no young artist for a long time has had as meteoric a career on Broadway as Sophie Rouminof. Leaping from comparative obscurity, she has scintillated before us in revue and musical comedy for the last three or four years, and now, at the zenith of her success, when popularity is hers to do what she likes with, she goes back to her native element, the obscurity from which she sprang. Some first-rate artists have got religion, philanthropy, or love, and have renounced the footlights for them; but Sophie is doing so for no better reason, it is said, than that she is <i xml:lang="fr">écoeuré</i> of us and our life⁠—the life of any and all great cities. A well-known impresario informs us that a week or two ago he asked her to name her own terms for a new contract; but she would have nothing to do with one on any terms. And now she has slipped back into the darkness of space and time, like one of her own magnificent opals, and the bill and boards of the little Opera House will know her name and fascinating personality no more.”</p>
			</blockquote>
			<p>The faint smile deepened in Sophie’s eyes.</p>
			<p>“It’s true, isn’t it, Sophie?” Martha asked, as Sophie did not speak when she had finished reading.</p>
			<p>“I suppose it is,” Sophie said. “But your paper doesn’t say what made me <i xml:lang="fr">écoeuré</i>⁠—sick to the heart, that is⁠—of the life over there, Martha. And that’s the main thing.⁠ ⁠… It got me down so, I thought I’d never sing again. But there’s one thing I’d like you to tell people for me, Martha: <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Armitage was always goodness itself to me. He didn’t even ask me to go away with him. He did make love to me, and I was just a silly little girl. I didn’t know then men go on like that without meaning much.⁠ ⁠… I wanted to be a singer, and I made up my mind to go away when he did.⁠ ⁠… Afterwards I lost my voice. My heart wouldn’t sing any more. I wanted to come home.⁠ ⁠… That’s all I knew.⁠ ⁠… I wanted to come home.⁠ ⁠… And I came.”</p>
			<p>Martha went to her. Her arms went round Sophie’s neck.</p>
			<p>“My lamb,” she whispered.</p>
			<p>Sophie rested against her for a moment. Then she kissed one of the bare arms she had watched working the iron so vigorously.</p>
			<p>“We’d best not think of it, Mother M’Cready,” she said.</p>
			<p>“All right, dearie!”</p>
			<p>Martha withdrew her arms and went back to the hearth. She lifted another iron, held it to her face to judge its heat, and returned to the table. She rubbed the iron on a piece of hessian on a box there, dusted it with a soft rag, and went on with the ironing of her dress.</p>
			<p>“I wish I was as young as you, Martha,” Sophie said.</p>
			<p>“Lord, lovey, you will be when you’re my age,” Martha replied, with a swift, twinkling glance of her blue eyes. “But you’re coming⁠ ⁠… aren’t you? I won’t have the heart to wear my pink stockings if you don’t, Sophie. <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Newton gave them to me for a Christmas-box⁠ ⁠… and I’m fair dying to wear them.”</p>
			<p>Sophie smiled at the pair of bright pink stockings pinned on the line beside a newly-starched petticoat.</p>
			<p>“You will, won’t you?”</p>
			<p>Sophie shook her head.</p>
			<p>“I don’t think so, Martha.”</p>
			<p>Sophie went out of the doorway. She was going home, and stood again a moment, looking through scattered trees to the waning afternoon sky. A couple of birds dashed across her line of vision with shrill, low, giggling cries.</p>
			<p>She heard people talking in the distance. Several men rode up to Newton’s. She saw them swing from their horses, put the reins over the pegs before the bar, and go into the hotel. Two or three children ran down the street chattering eagerly, excitedly. Roy O’Mara went across to the hall with some flags under his arm. From all the huts drifted ejaculations, fragments of laughter and calling. Excitement about the ball was in the air.</p>
			<p>Sophie remembered how happy and excited she used to be about the Ridge balls. She thought of it all vaguely at first, that lost girlish joy of hers, the free, careless gaiety which had swept her along as she danced. She remembered her father’s fiddling, <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Newton’s playing; how the music had had a magic in it which set everybody’s feet flying and the boys singing to tunes they knew. The men polished the floor so that you could scarcely walk on it. One year they had spent hours working it up so that you slipped along like greased lightning as you danced.</p>
			<p>Sophie smiled at her reminiscences. The high tones of a man’s voice, eager and exultant, shouting to someone across the twilight; the twitter of a girl’s laughter⁠—they were all in the air now as they had been then. Her listlessness stirred; everybody was preparing for the ball, and getting ready to go to it. Excitement and eager looking forward to a good time were in the air. They were infectious. Sophie trembled to them⁠—they tempted her. Could she go to the ball, like everybody else? Could she drift again in the stream of easy and genial intercourse with all these people of the Ridge whom she loved and who loved her?</p>
			<p>Martha came to the door. Her eyes strained on the brooding young face, trying to read from the changing expressions which flitted across it what Sophie was thinking.</p>
			<p>“You’re coming, aren’t you, dearie?” she begged.</p>
			<p>Sophie’s eyes surprised the old woman, the brilliance of tears and light in them, their childish playing of hope beyond hope and fear, amazed her.</p>
			<p>“Do you think I could, Martha?” she cried. “Do you think I could?”</p>
			<p>“ ’Course you could, darling,” Martha said.</p>
			<p>Sophie’s arms went round her in an instant’s quick pressure; then she stood off from her.</p>
			<p>“Won’t it be lovely,” she cried, “to dance and sing⁠—and to be young again, Martha?”</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
