<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-AU">
	<head>
		<title>VII</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section data-parent="part-2" id="chapter-2-7" epub:type="chapter">
			<h3 epub:type="z3998:ordinal z3998:roman">VII</h3>
			<p>Michael had lit the lamp in Rouminof‚Äôs kitchen; innumerable tiny-winged insects, moths, mosquitoes, midges, and golden-winged flying ants hung in a cloud about it. Martha M‚ÄôCready, Pony-Fence Inglewood, and George Woods were there talking to Paul and Michael when Sophie went into the kitchen.</p>
			<p>‚ÄúHere she is,‚Äù Paul said.</p>
			<p>Martha rose from her place on the sofa and trundled cross to her.</p>
			<p>‚ÄúDearie!‚Äù she cried, as George and Pony-Fence called:</p>
			<p>‚ÄúH‚Äôllo, Sophie!‚Äù</p>
			<p>And Sophie said: ‚ÄúHullo, George! Hullo, Pony-Fence!‚Äù</p>
			<p>Martha‚Äôs embrace cut short what else she may have had to say. Sophie warmed to her as she had when she was a child. Martha had been so plump and soft to rub against, and a sensation of sheer animal comfort and rejoicing ran through Sophie as she felt herself against Martha again. The slight briny smell of her skin was sweet to her with associations of so many old loving and impulsive hugs, so much loving kindness.</p>
			<p>‚ÄúOh, Mother M‚ÄôCready,‚Äù she cried, a more joyous note in her voice than Michael had yet heard, ‚Äúit is nice to see you again!‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúLord, lovey,‚Äù Martha replied, disengaging her arms, ‚Äúand they‚Äôd got me that scared of you‚ÅÝ‚Äîsaying what a toff you were. I thought you‚Äôd be tellin‚Äô me my place if I tried this sort of thing. But when I saw you a minute ago, I clean forgot all about it. I saw you were just my own little Sophie back again‚ÅÝ‚Ää‚ÅÝ‚Ä¶ and I couldn‚Äôt ‚Äôve helped throwing me arms round you‚ÅÝ‚Äînot for the life of me.‚Äù</p>
			<p>She was winking and blinking her little blue eyes to keep the tears in them, and Sophie laughed the tears back from her eyes too.</p>
			<p>‚ÄúThere she is!‚Äù a great, hearty voice exclaimed in the doorway.</p>
			<p>And Bully Bryant, carrying the baby, with Ella beside him, came into the room.</p>
			<p>‚ÄúBully!‚Äù Sophie cried, as she went towards them, ‚ÄúAnd Ella!‚Äù</p>
			<p>Ella threw out her arms and clung to Sophie.</p>
			<p>‚ÄúShe‚Äôs been that excited, Sophie,‚Äù Bully said, ‚ÄúI couldn‚Äôt hardly get her to wait till this evening to come along.‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúOh, Bully!‚Äù Ella protested shyly.</p>
			<p>‚ÄúAnd the baby?‚Äù Sophie cried, taking his son from Bull. ‚ÄúJust fancy you and Ella being married, Bully, and having a baby, and me not knowing a word about it!‚Äù</p>
			<p>The baby roared lustily, and Bully took him from Sophie as Watty Frost, the Crosses, and Roy O‚ÄôMara came through the door.</p>
			<p>‚ÄúHullo, Watty, Archie, Tom, Roy!‚Äù Sophie exclaimed with a little gasp of pleasure and excitement, shaking hands with each one of them as they came to her.</p>
			<p>She had not expected people to come to see her like this, and was surprised by the genial warmth and real affection of the greetings they had given her. Everybody was laughing and talking, the little room was full to brimming when Bill Grant appeared in the doorway, and beside him the tall, gaunt figure of the woman Sophie loved more than any other woman on the Ridge‚ÅÝ‚ÄîMaggie Grant, looking not a day older, and wearing a blue print dress with a pin-spot washed almost out of it, as she had done as long as Sophie could remember.</p>
			<p>Sophie went to the long, straight glance of her eyes as to a call. Maggie kissed her. She did not speak; but her beautiful, deep-set eyes spoke for her. Sophie shook hands with Bill Grant.</p>
			<p>‚ÄúGlad to see you back again, Sophie,‚Äù he said simply.</p>
			<p>‚ÄúThank you, Bill,‚Äù she replied.</p>
			<p>Then Potch came in; and behind him, slowly, from out of the night, Snowshoes. The Grants had moved from the door to give him passage; but he stood outside a moment, his tall, white figure and old sugar-loaf hat outlined against the blue-dark wall of the night sky, as though he did not know whether he would go into the room or not.</p>
			<p>Then he crossed the threshold, took off his hat, and stood in a stiff, gallant attitude until Sophie saw him. He had a fistful of yellow flowers in one hand. Everybody knew Sophie had been fond of punti. But there were only a few bushes scattered about the Ridge, and they had done flowering a month ago, so Snowshoes‚Äô bouquet was something of a triumph. He must have walked miles, to the swamp, perhaps, to find it, those who saw him knew.</p>
			<p>‚ÄúOh, <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr>¬ÝRiley!‚Äù Sophie cried, as she went to shake hands with him.</p>
			<p>‚ÄúThey still call me Snowshoes, Sophie,‚Äù the old man said.</p>
			<p>The men laughed, and Sophie joined them. She knew, as they all did, that although anyone of them was called by the name the Ridge gave him, no one ever addressed Snowshoes as anything but <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr>¬ÝRiley.</p>
			<p>He held the flowers out to her.</p>
			<p>‚ÄúPunti!‚Äù she exclaimed delightedly, holding the yellow blossoms to her nose. ‚ÄúIsn‚Äôt it lovely?‚ÅÝ‚Ää‚ÅÝ‚Ä¶ No flower in the world‚Äôs got such a perfume!‚Äù</p>
			<p>Michael had explained to the guests that Sophie was not to be asked to sing, and that nothing was to be said about her singing. Something had gone wrong with her voice, he told two or three of the men.</p>
			<p>He thought he had put the fear of God into Paul, and had managed to make him understand that it distressed Sophie to talk about her singing, and he must not bother her with questions about it. But in a lull of the talk Paul‚Äôs voice was raised querulously:</p>
			<p>‚ÄúWhat I can‚Äôt make out, Sophie,‚Äù he said, ‚Äúis why you can‚Äôt sing? What‚Äôs happened to your voice? Have you been singing too much? Or have you caught cold? I always told you you‚Äôd have to be careful, or your voice‚Äôd go like your mother‚Äôs did. If you‚Äôd listened to me, now, or I‚Äôd been with you.‚ÅÝ‚Ää‚ÅÝ‚Ä¶‚Äù</p>
			<p>Bully Bryant, catching Michael‚Äôs eye, burst across Paul‚Äôs drivelling with a hearty guffaw.</p>
			<p>‚ÄúWell,‚Äù he said, ‚ÄúSophie‚Äôs already had a sample of the fine lungs of this family, and I don‚Äôt mind givin‚Äô her another, and then Ella and me‚Äôll have to be takin‚Äô Buffalo Bill home to bed. Now then, old son, just let ‚Äôem see what we can do.‚Äù He raised his voice to singing pitch:</p>
			<p>‚ÄúFor-er she‚Äôs a jolly good fellow, for-er‚ÅÝ‚Äî‚Äù</p>
			<p>All the men and women in the hut joined in Bully‚Äôs roar, singing in a way which meant much more than the words‚ÅÝ‚Äîsinging from their hearts, every man and woman of them.</p>
			<p>Then Bully put his baby under his arm as though it were a bundle of washing, Ella protesting anxiously, and the pair of them said good night to Sophie. Snowshoes went out before them; and Martha said she would walk down to the town with Bully and Ella. Bill Grant and Maggie said good night.</p>
			<p>‚ÄúSophie looks as if she‚Äôd sleep without rocking tonight,‚Äù Maggie Grant said by way of indicating that everybody ought to go home soon and let Sophie get to bed early.</p>
			<p>‚ÄúI will,‚Äù Sophie replied.</p>
			<p>Pony-Fence and the Crosses were getting towards the door, Watty and George followed them.</p>
			<p>‚ÄúIt‚Äôs about time you was back, that‚Äôs what I say, Sophie,‚Äù George Woods said, gripping her hand as he passed. ‚ÄúThere‚Äôs been no luck on this field since you went away.‚Äù</p>
			<p>Sophie smiled into his kindly brown eyes.</p>
			<p>‚ÄúThat‚Äôs right,‚Äù Watty backed up his mate heartily.</p>
			<p>‚ÄúBut,‚Äù Sophie said, ‚Äúthey tell me Potch has had all the luck.‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúSo he has,‚Äù George Woods agreed.</p>
			<p>‚ÄúIt‚Äôs a great stone, isn‚Äôt it, Sophie?‚Äù Watty said.</p>
			<p>‚ÄúI haven‚Äôt seen it yet,‚Äù Sophie said. ‚ÄúMichael said he‚Äôd get Potch to show it to me tonight.‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúNot seen it?‚Äù George gasped. ‚ÄúNot seen the big opal! Say, boys‚Äù‚ÅÝ‚Äîhe turned to Pony-Fence, and the Crosses‚ÅÝ‚Äî‚ÄúI reck‚Äôn we‚Äôll have to stay for this. Sophie hasn‚Äôt seen Potch‚Äôs opal yet. Bring her along, Potch. Bring her along, and let‚Äôs all have another squint at her. You can‚Äôt get too much of a good thing.‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúRight,‚Äù Potch replied.</p>
			<p>He went out of the hut to bring the opal from his own room.</p>
			<p>‚ÄúReck‚Äôn it‚Äôs the finest stone ever found on this field,‚Äù Watty said, ‚Äúand the biggest. How much did you say Potch had turned down for it, Michael?‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúFour hundred,‚Äù Michael said.</p>
			<p>‚ÄúWhat are you hangin‚Äô on to her for, Michael?‚Äù Pony-Fence asked.</p>
			<p>Michael shook his head, that faint smile of his flickering.</p>
			<p>‚ÄúPotch‚Äôs had an idea he didn‚Äôt want to part with her,‚Äù he said. ‚ÄúBut I daresay he‚Äôll be letting her go soon.‚Äù</p>
			<p>He did not say ‚Äúnow.‚Äù But the men understood that. They guessed that Potch had been waiting for this moment; that he wanted to show Sophie the stone before selling it.</p>
			<p>Potch came into the room again, his head back, an indefinable triumph and elation in his eyes as they sought Sophie‚Äôs. He had a mustard tin, skinned of its gaudy paper covering, in his hand. A religious awe and emotion stirred the men as, standing beside Sophie, he put the tin on the table. They crowded about the table, muscles tightening in sun-red, weather-tanned faces, some of them as dark as the bronze of an old penny, the light in their eyes brightening, sharpening‚ÅÝ‚Äîa thirsting, eager expression in every face. Potch screwed off the lid of the tin, lifted the stone in its wrappings, and unrolled the dingy flannel which he had put round it. Then he took the opal from its bed of cotton wool.</p>
			<p>Sophie leaned forward, her eyes shining, her breath coming quickly. The emotion in the room made itself felt through her.</p>
			<p>‚ÄúPut out the lamp, Michael, and let‚Äôs have a candle,‚Äù George said.</p>
			<p>Michael turned out the lamp, struck a match and set it to the candle in a bottle on the dresser behind him. He put the candle on the table. Potch held the great opal to the light, he moved it slowly behind the flame of the candle.</p>
			<p>‚ÄúOh!‚Äù</p>
			<p>Sophie‚Äôs cry of quivering ecstasy thrilled her hearers. She was one of them; she had been brought up among them. They had known she would feel opal as they did. But that cry of hers heightened their enthusiasm.</p>
			<p>The breaths of suppressed excitement and admiration, and their muttered exclamations went up:</p>
			<p>‚ÄúNow, she‚Äôs showin‚Äô!‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúGod, look at her now!‚Äù</p>
			<p>Sophie followed every movement of the opal in Potch‚Äôs hand. It was a world in itself, with its thousand thousand suns and stars, shimmering and changing before her eyes as they melted mysteriously in the jetty pool of the stone.</p>
			<p>‚ÄúOh!‚Äù she breathed again, amazed, dazed, and rapturous.</p>
			<p>Potch came closer to her. They stood together, adoring the orb of miraculous and mysterious beauty.</p>
			<p>‚ÄúHere,‚Äù Potch said, ‚Äúyou hold her, Sophie.‚Äù</p>
			<p>Sophie put out her hand, trembling, filled with childlike awe and emotion. She stretched her fingers. The stone weighed heavy and cold on them. Then there was a thin, silvery sound like the shivering of glass.‚ÅÝ‚Ää‚ÅÝ‚Ä¶ Her hand was light and empty. She stood staring at it for a moment; her eyes went to Potch‚Äôs face, aghast. The blood seemed to have left her body. She stood so with her hand out, her lips parted, her eyes wide.‚ÅÝ‚Ää‚ÅÝ‚Ä¶</p>
			<p>After a while she knew Potch was holding her, and that he was saying:</p>
			<p>‚ÄúIt‚Äôs all right! It‚Äôs all right, Sophie!‚Äù</p>
			<p>She could feel him, something to lean against, beside her. Michael lifted the candle. With strange intensity, as though she were dreaming, Sophie saw the men had fallen away from the table. All their faces were caricatures, distorted and ghastly; and they were looking at the floor near her. Sophie‚Äôs eyes went to the floor, too. She could see shattered stars‚ÅÝ‚Äîred, green, gold, blue, and amethyst‚ÅÝ‚Äîout across the earthen floor.</p>
			<p>Michael put the candle on the floor. He and George Woods gathered them up. When Sophie looked up, the dark of the room swam with galaxies of those stars‚ÅÝ‚Äîred, green, gold, blue, and amethyst.</p>
			<p>She stood staring before her: she had lost the power to move or to think. After a while she knew that the men had gone from the room, and that Potch was still beside her, his eyes on her face. He had eyes only for her face: he had barely glanced at the floor, where infinitesimal specks of coloured light were still winking in the dust. He took her hands. Sophie heard him talking, although she did not know what he was saying.</p>
			<p>When she began to understand what Potch was saying, Sophie was sitting on the sofa under the window, and Potch was kneeling beside her. At first she heard him talking as if he were a long way away. She tried to listen; tried to understand what he was saying.</p>
			<p>‚ÄúIt‚Äôs all right, Sophie,‚Äù Potch kept saying, his voice breaking.</p>
			<p>Sight of her suffering overwhelmed him; and he trembled as he knelt beside her. Sophie heard him crying distantly:</p>
			<p>‚ÄúIt‚Äôs all right! It‚Äôs all right, Sophie!‚Äù</p>
			<p>She shuddered. Her eyes went to him, consciousness in their blank gaze. Potch, realising that, murmured incoherently:</p>
			<p>‚ÄúDon‚Äôt think of it any more.‚ÅÝ‚Ää‚ÅÝ‚Ä¶ It was yours, Sophie. It was for you I was keeping it.‚ÅÝ‚Ää‚ÅÝ‚Ä¶ Michael knew that, too. He knew that was why I didn‚Äôt want to sell.‚ÅÝ‚Ää‚ÅÝ‚Ä¶ It was your opal‚ÅÝ‚Ää‚ÅÝ‚Ä¶ to do what you liked with, really. That was what I meant when I put it in your hand. But don‚Äôt let us think of it any more. I don‚Äôt want to think of it any more.‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúOh!‚Äù Sophie cried, in a bitter wailing; ‚Äúit‚Äôs true, I believe‚ÅÝ‚Ää‚ÅÝ‚Ä¶ somebody said once that I‚Äôm as unlucky as opal‚ÅÝ‚Äîthat I bring people bad luck like opal.‚ÅÝ‚Ää‚ÅÝ‚Ä¶‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúYou know what we say on the Ridge?‚Äù Potch said; ‚ÄúThe only bad luck you get through opal is when you can‚Äôt get enough of it‚ÅÝ‚Äîso the only bad luck you‚Äôre likely to bring to people is when they can‚Äôt get enough of you.‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúPotch!‚Äù</p>
			<p>Sophie‚Äôs hands went to him in a flutter of breaking grief. The forgiveness she could not ask, the gratitude for his gentleness, which she could not express any other way, were in the gesture and exclamation.</p>
			<p>On her hands, through his hot, clasped hands, the whole of Potch‚Äôs being throbbed.</p>
			<p>‚ÄúDon‚Äôt think of it any more,‚Äù he begged.</p>
			<p>‚ÄúBut it was your luck‚ÅÝ‚Äîyour wonderful opal‚ÅÝ‚Äîand‚ÅÝ‚Ää‚ÅÝ‚Ä¶ I broke it, Potch. I spoilt your luck.‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúNo,‚Äù Potch said, borne away from himself on the flood of his desire to assuage her distress. ‚ÄúYou make everything beautiful for me, Sophie. Since you came back I haven‚Äôt thought of the stone: I‚Äôd forgotten it.‚ÅÝ‚Ää‚ÅÝ‚Ä¶ This hasn‚Äôt been the same place. I‚Äôm so filled up with happiness because you‚Äôre here that I can‚Äôt think of anything else.‚Äù</p>
			<p>Sophie looked into his face, her eyes swimming. She saw the deep passion of love in Potch‚Äôs eyes; but she turned away from the light it poured over her, her face overcast again, bitterness and grief in it. She hung so for a moment; then her hands went over her face and she was crying abstractedly, wearily.</p>
			<p>There was something in her aloofness in that moment which chilled Potch. His instincts, sensitive as the antennae of an insect, wavered over her, trying to discover the cause of it. Conscious of a mood which excluded him, he withdrew his hand from her. Sophie groped for it. Then the sense of sex and of barriers swept from him, by the passion of his desire to comfort and console her. Potch put his arm round her and drew Sophie to him, murmuring with an utter tenderness, ‚ÄúSophie! Sophie!‚Äù</p>
			<p>Later she said:</p>
			<p>‚ÄúI can‚Äôt tell you‚ÅÝ‚Ää‚ÅÝ‚Ä¶ what happened‚ÅÝ‚Ää‚ÅÝ‚Ä¶ out there, Potch. Not yet‚ÅÝ‚Ää‚ÅÝ‚Ä¶ not now.‚ÅÝ‚Ää‚ÅÝ‚Ä¶ Perhaps some day I will. It hurt so much that it took all the singing out of me. My heart wouldn‚Äôt move‚ÅÝ‚Ää‚ÅÝ‚Ä¶ so my voice died. I thought if I came home, you and Michael wouldn‚Äôt mind‚ÅÝ‚Ää‚ÅÝ‚Ä¶ my being like I am. But you‚Äôve all been so good to me, Potch‚ÅÝ‚Ää‚ÅÝ‚Ä¶ and it‚Äôs so restful here, I was beginning to think that life might go on from where I left it; that it might be just a quiet living together and loving, like it was before.‚ÅÝ‚Ää‚ÅÝ‚Ä¶‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúIt can, Sophie!‚Äù Potch said, his eyes on her face, wistful and eager to read her thought.</p>
			<p>‚ÄúBut look what I‚Äôve done,‚Äù she said.</p>
			<p>Potch lifted her hand to his lips, a resurge of the virile male in him moving his restraint.</p>
			<p>‚ÄúI‚Äôve told you,‚Äù he said, ‚Äúwhat you‚Äôve done. You‚Äôve put joy into all our hearts‚ÅÝ‚Äîjust to see you again. Michael‚Äôs told you that, too, and George and the rest of them.‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúYes, but, Potch‚ÅÝ‚Ää‚ÅÝ‚Ä¶‚Äù Sophie paused, and he saw the shadow of dark thoughts in her eyes again. ‚ÄúI‚Äôm not what you think I am. I‚Äôm not like any of you think.‚Äù</p>
			<p>Potch‚Äôs grip on her hand tightened.</p>
			<p>‚ÄúYou‚Äôre you‚ÅÝ‚Äîand you‚Äôre here. That‚Äôs enough for us!‚Äù he said.</p>
			<p>Sophie sighed. ‚ÄúI never dreamt everybody would be so good. You and Michael I knew would‚ÅÝ‚Äîbut the others‚ÅÝ‚Ää‚ÅÝ‚Ä¶ I thought they‚Äôd remember‚ÅÝ‚Ää‚ÅÝ‚Ä¶ and disapprove of me, Potch.‚ÅÝ‚Ää‚ÅÝ‚Ä¶ <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr>¬ÝWatty‚Äù‚ÅÝ‚Äîa smile showed faintly in her eyes‚ÅÝ‚Äî‚ÄúI thought she‚Äôd see to that.‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúI daresay she‚Äôs done her best,‚Äù Potch said, with a memory of Watty‚Äôs valiant bearing and angry, bright eyes when he came into the hut. ‚ÄúWatty was vexed‚ÅÝ‚Ää‚ÅÝ‚Ä¶ she wouldn‚Äôt come with him tonight.‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúWas he?‚Äù</p>
			<p>Potch nodded. ‚ÄúWhat you didn‚Äôt reck‚Äôn on,‚Äù he said, ‚Äúwas that all of us here‚ÅÝ‚Ää‚ÅÝ‚Ä¶ we‚ÅÝ‚Äîwe love you, Sophie, and we‚Äôre glad you‚Äôre back again.‚Äù</p>
			<p>Her eyes met him in a straight, clear glance.</p>
			<p>‚ÄúYou and Michael,‚Äù she said, ‚ÄúI knew you loved me, Potch.‚ÅÝ‚Ää‚ÅÝ‚Ä¶‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúYou know how it‚Äôs always been with me,‚Äù Potch said, grateful that he might talk of his love, although he had been afraid to since she had cried, fearing thought of it stirred that unknown source of distress. ‚ÄúBut I won‚Äôt get in your way here, Sophie, because of that. I won‚Äôt bother you‚ÅÝ‚Ää‚ÅÝ‚Ä¶ I want just to stand by‚ÅÝ‚Äîand help you all I know how.‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúI love you, too, Potch,‚Äù Sophie said; ‚Äúbut there are so many ways of loving. I love you because you love me; because your love is the one sure thing in the world for me.‚ÅÝ‚Ää‚ÅÝ‚Ä¶ I‚Äôve thought of it when I‚Äôve been hurt and lonely.‚ÅÝ‚Ää‚ÅÝ‚Ä¶ I came back because it was here‚ÅÝ‚Ää‚ÅÝ‚Ä¶ and you were here.‚Äù</p>
			<p>Potch‚Äôs eyes were illumined; his face blazed as though a fire had been engendered in the depths of his body. He remained so a moment, curbed and overcome with emotion. The shadow deepened in Sophie‚Äôs eyes as she looked at him; her face was grave and still.</p>
			<p>‚ÄúI do love you, Potch,‚Äù she said again; ‚Äúnot as I loved someone else, once. That was different. But you‚Äôre so good to me‚ÅÝ‚Ää‚ÅÝ‚Ä¶ and I‚Äôm so tired.‚Äù</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
